UNIVERSAL CLASSES OF HASH FUNCTIONS 147

mately 1. Proposition 3 then implies that the expected cost of processing a sequence
of requests is linear in the number of requests. Notice that this linear bound holds
for any sequence of requests, not just for the “average” sequence. Fagin, Nievergelt,
Pippenger and Strong [2] have developed an extendible hashing scheme which achieves
the linear time bound even when there is no estimate on | S|. Their system involves
little overhead, and only requires local remapping of data as | S| expands or contracts.

Proposition 2 is helpful for other applications of hashing as well. For instance, an
optical character reader postprocessing system is described in [9]. This system is designed
to check if a word « is a member of a set of valid words S, The set { f(y) | S} is
stored in memory. To test whether x is in S, a check is made to see if f(x) is in the stored
set. Since f(y) is generally shorter than y, a considerable amount of space is saved.
However, there is a chance of error; if f(x) = f(y) for some y € S, then x may erroneously
be accepted as valid.

Proposition 2 gives a hound on the probability of error when f is chosen from a class
of universal, functions, and suggests that to achieve an error probability of less than p,
we should let B have size | S |/p. To be precise, Proposition 2 says that if x and S are
specified, then a randomly chosen f will erroneously accept x with probability less than
1/p. This is not the order of doing things which will occur in practice of course. First
f is chosen by the system designer, then x is input by the user. However, assuming
that the user does not choose « based on any knowledge of the hash function chosen,
the order of choice is immaterial to the probability.

We no not intend to imply that all functions in a universal, class are equally good:
conceivably there is a function which maps each input into the same element of B,
and another which maps each element of S into one element of B and maps everything
else into a different index. The first function would accept any « as valid, whereas the
second would never make a mistake. What is gained by using a universal, class is the
knowledge that if one has simply made a random choice of hash function from such
a class there is a favorable probability that a given mistake will be caught. Intuitively,
we are saying that a universal, class contains enough good functions that a random choice
is very likely to be a good choice. In particular, we need not be concerned with statistics
on the frequencies of English letter combinations or with probable spelling errors.

For some applications of hashing, it is not enough to know that the average performance
will be good. ‘There may be some level of performance such that any worse performance
would not be tolerated. For instance, in an online application, we may want some
assurance that no individual transaction will cost more than, say, ¢ times the expected
cost. The next proposition gives some assurance in this direction.

PROPOSITION 4. Let xe A and SC A. Let yp be the expected value of &,(x, S). (By
Proposition 2, p< \S({| B\.} Choose f at random from a universal, collection of functions,
H. Then the probability that 8,(x, S) > ty is less than 1/t.

Proof. The collection of numbers {5,(x, S)| fe H} has mean » but no negative
numbers. Thus, for each function with 8,(x, S) > tz, there must be more than t — |
functions with 8,(x, S) <p to keep the mean down to «. ff
